‘When do we get to the fire-tamers?’ my 10-year-old daughter asks from the backseat. Rain splatters against the windscreen. As we drive across salt marshes, a chill sea wind blows over the north-westerly French peninsula where we live; the tide is rising. By the road, in flooded fields, trees mirror in rippling water. The world doubles. ‘Soon,’ I say.Ten minutes later, inside a lost farmhouse ringed by red geraniums, an elderly Breton woman whispers to a stone. In her gloomy kitchen, the French version of the TV show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? murmurs from a flickering screen. The woman rubs the stone up and down my daughter’s fingers, whispering unintelligible words.Finally, she points to a large wart: ‘That one is the queen.’ My daughter has dozens of growths on her hands. For a year, we’ve tried chemists’ kits and dermatologist treatments. Nothing has worked. Recently, a nurse colleague of mine suggested that we consult a fire-tamer, giving me Madame Abgrall’s address.‘The queen will go first,’ Mme Abgrall says when she’s finished, ‘then the others will disappear.’ Without speaking, I slide a €10 note on to her table. As a fire-tamer, Mme Abgrall can’t ask for money, my colleague warned me, or her ‘gift’ would disappear.When we get home, I tell my husband: ‘I hope it will work but I don’t know if I believe it can…’ My voice falters. ‘It’s ancient power,’ he tries to convince me.British-born, we’ve lived in Brittany for nearly 15 years; my husband is drawn to Breton culture, especially the ‘land of legends’ and the Celtic otherworld, and owns academic books on Druidry. But he’s had a suburban upbringing, whereas I spent my childhood in a commune surrounded by hippies and performative quackery. Possibly in consequence, I favour hard science. I work in hospitals, train doctors, and work with treatment plans and protocols.Yet, after our visit, I can’t stop thinking about the woman, her humility. The quiet power that enveloped the kitchen scene. Within weeks, the warts have gone and my daughter’s skin is clear; they never reappear. Questions inundate my mind: was it real? Did Mme Abgrall cure the warts? And who are the fire-tamers anyway?Fast-forward a decade: according to a documentary by Radio France, there are more than 5,000 traditional healers in France today, and at least two-thirds of the French population have consulted such a practitioner. However, there are no official statistics about fire-taming, no organisation or diploma to validate or regulate this treatment. Instead, fire-tamers – women and men predominantly based in rural areas – are known to have a ‘gift’. Contacted by word-of-mouth, they help with shingles, burns, eczema, teething, skin complaints – pathologies associated with excessive redness or swelling, that is to say, with inflammation, a word stemming from the Latin for igniting a fire. Using their hands, the fire-tamers ‘cut’, ‘channel’, ‘block’ and ‘pass’ the fire, taking it away from an inflamed zone. As a result, they are also known as fire-cutters, fire-soothers, fire-touchers, fire-passers or fire-charmers.Gathering data on their proceedings is like catching a whisper in the wind. As the French doctor Valentina Vidano writes in her 2018 study, fire-tamers work in secret and often without payment, meaning there is no paper trail. It is both intriguing and disconcerting. The annals of fire-taming have been chronicled in oral history, transmitted between generations in gestures and rituals as safely guarded secrets.