Magical thinking has been prevalent in cultures all around the world for centuries and come in many different forms for different purposes. Although there may be similarities between some countries, some ideas that come from magical thinking is unique to each their country, due to beliefs that were already existing that were built upon as the country developed. Magical thinking could occur for any number of reasons, but its usage often correlates to when people need something that seems realistic to grab onto and use in times when their future is unknown. Although some practices are harmless like superstitions, other more desperate practices can lead to people getting seriously hurt, all so they could relieve some worries that they may have for the future. Magical practices hold a lot of weight even in modern day situations, so it is important to know why these practices are so important to so many people.
Lecture 8 as well as its readings focuses on different types of magical thinking, ranging from superstitions in sports and everyday life, to supposed remedies for illness that have no science to support it. The practices that are the main focus of the readings are practices like superstitions which differs from country to country as well as within daily life and especially sports, old practices that are magically related like witchcraft, and practices that relate to health and well-being. The authors are writing about many cultures but many of the readings focus on the United States and the many examples of magic thinking that have immerged from the country. Each reading discusses a different type of magical thinking with one reading taking about American baseball since that is where superstitious actions are often seen and performed in sports (Gmelch, 1992). Another reading talks about the effect of COVID and the new magical remedies that have appeared throughout the globe to try and fight the unknown virus (Gusterson, Moses, & Coutros, 2020). While one discusses the effects of magical thinking and how it connects to the witch trials that occurred all over America but specifically Soweto (Ashforth, 2000). So overall, all of the readings have an general theme of magical thinking and how humans are often influenced by these thoughts.