One of the most famous and well known selling food products in the world is chocolate. It is used in products such as cakes, candy bars, drinks, cocoa powder, etc.  Everyone enjoys chocolate but most people don’t know where chocolate originates from or what ingredients are found in it. Some important things to consider about chocolate is the process of making it in the factory, what it does to the environment, and how it affects the earth. Not all the chocolate that is made is safe for the environment and it is crucial that its production is sustainable for a healthier planet.

Chocolate is produced from the fruit of Theobroma cacao, a tropical plant that is called the “food of the gods” in Greek, according to a digital display by the Cornell University Library, “Chocolate: Food of the Gods” (Jessie Szalay, 2018). The Coca is grown on the trunk of the tree and its branches, they are called pods. The pods contain seeds known as cocoa beans. A seed covering, a kernel and a germ make up the beans (GROWING COCOA). Harvesting includes removing mature pods from the trees and opening them to remove the wet beans. The pods are extracted manually by using a well-sharpened knife to make a clean slice through the stalk. A pruning hook type of tool can be used for pods high on the tree, with a handle at the end of a long pole. The upper and lower blades of the tool allow the stalk to be cut cleanly without damaging the branch that bears it by pushing or pulling it according to the position of the fruit (International Cocoa Organization, 2010).  When the manufacturers get the cocoa beans, the first step is to put the cocoa in a roasting machine.  It produces the natural scent, color, and eventually the taste that people today recognize as they roast the cocoa. Once cocoa has been put in the machine the cocoa beans have an internal and an outer layer. The outer layer is removed and the inner layer of cocoa is broken down into small pieces called “cocoa nibs.” The roasting process is intended to make the shells of cocoa breakable so that the nibs of cocoa can pass through a series of a colander that separates the nibs according to their size and shape. We switch into stage two after the first step is finished, which is the method of grinding the cocoa nibs, which is then made into “cocoa liquor.” It is also regarded as chocolate or cocoa powder that is not sweetened. The grinding process creates heat that turns the dry granular texture of the cocoa nib into a fluid as the high-fat content of the nib melts (the chocolate production). It is mixed with cocoa butter and sugar after they have the cocoa liquor. The final step is the combination of cocoa liquor and chocolate molding (chocolate production). The mixture is further tasteful after the blending process to reduce the particle size of the added milk and sugar to the desired fineness. In different amounts, the cocoa powder is blended back with butter and liquor to produce many forms of chocolate. Dark chocolate, milk chocolate, and white chocolate are the three most common types of chocolate. All these types have some common ingredients: sugar, milk or milk powder, cocoa powder, cocoa butter, etc. Eventually, when all the materials are combined and completed, forming is the last phase of chocolate production. This gives the cocoa liquor time to cool down and become solid in the shape it was put in when all this is done. In the end, chocolate is loaded and shipped all over the world (chocolate production).

