Since artificial intelligence went mainstream a few years ago, it has done double duty as a political personality test: tell me what you think about AI, and I’ll tell you who you are. Those worried about climate change focus on energy consumption. Those who denounce late capitalism see it as the ultimate example of corporate monopoly. Those concerned about racism have warned about AI biases. Those studying the effects of colonialism see it as yet another form of exploitation. And those tending toward doom have seen ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini and Grok as the four riders of the apocalypse.People in the arts and culture have felt particularly threatened by AI because the technology seems to be coming for the things they cherish the most: the creative use of images, words, and ideas. The latter two, words and ideas, have been in the centre of the storm because generative AI is based on language and because ideas are closely associated with the words in which they are expressed. In response, writers have largely opted for resistance, defending the genuine creativity of humans against the machines. My social media feeds have been flooded with AI-slop gleefully produced and circulated by colleagues hoping to prove that AI can’t be creative. Let’s call this the Creative Resistance.Based on my experience teaching and lecturing across the world, the Creative Resistance is strongest in North America, much less dominant in India, and still less in China and Korea, with Europe somewhere in between. When I taught a class on AI and creativity in Seoul last summer, with students from across Asia as well as Latin America, they had a single concern: please teach us how to use these tools effectively. The only person calling for creative resistance was an American student who had strayed into the class. In India, too, I’ve had many interactions with people in the arts that showed a less defensive, more exploratory attitude.These anecdotal impressions are backed up by research measuring attitudes toward AI in different locations more generally. It’s tempting to speculate about reasons for this unequal distribution. The filmmaker Shekhar Kapur told me in a conversation that it was a matter of defending entrenched privileges: people in the Global South have less to lose and are therefore more open to new technologies. There might also be deeper philosophical and cultural attitudes, with Buddhist-inflected cultures less invested in the distinction between humans and non-humans.No matter where it exists, the Creative Resistance is understandable as a reaction to a disruptive technology, but ultimately it gets in the way of understanding AI. Over the past three years, I’ve experimented with AI and have come away a cautious optimist. AI may well be terrible news for software engineers, but I think it’s an intriguing development for people who care about language and ideas – precisely the people who currently reject it the most.