The science of human-induced climate change has been undeniable. The absolute consensus in the majority of the scientific community is that human activity has been leading to an increase in average global temperature. Moreover, there has been an avalanche of research done to link mountain of detrimental effects to the increase in carbon dioxide emission, such as high-frequency drought and heat waves leading to forest fires, flooding, ocean acidification, increase in sea level due to the shrinking and thinning of the Arctic ice, extreme weather such as erratic jet stream and high-wind-velocity hurricanes and typhoons, the expansion of deserts and subtropics, the extinction of many species and reduced diversity of many ecosystems, the decreased in crop-production and the drop in nutrition for our dietary needs that followed, etc. (“Global warming”).

The evidence is crystal clear and leaves no room for further scientific debate. Yet there are still people that deny climate change or refuse to take any action to prevent it. The multifaceted reasons that are usually given by denier usually stray away from the scientific enterprise, which is not misguided by any mean considering the complexity of the subject. Said reasons lie mostly in the realm of psychology, politics, economics, and religious faith. Among them is the argument that to ultimately decrease emission, we must increase emission to get all the impoverished people educated about and capable of making a difference in climate change, which is also one of the few that is worth considering because it has overwhelming evidence to support such as the observation that third-world country’s population generally care less about climate change. Even if we can come to the conclusion that even the aforementioned population should be actively participating in humanity’s cumulative effort to slow down emissions by restricting their industrial growth, is it just to force these people to stay impoverished by being underdeveloped, technologically speaking? Not allowing them to go through the industrial revolution as we did in the west is seemingly very hypocritical and unjust.

Despite the strong foundation in ethnic and economic of said counter-argument, it is still an absolute necessity, and a completely plausible one, to implement climate policy as it is according to the will and benefit of both giant corporations and the layman.

Jordan Peterson, although a psychology professor by train, is a well-respected climate change skeptic in the public’s eyes who claims to have worked for a UN committee on sustainable economic and ecological development. He argues that climate change is at best ” an absolutely catastrophic nightmarish mess…[because] First of all, it’s very difficult to separate the science from the politics. And second, even if the claims, the more radical claims are true we have no idea what to do about it… “. He elaborates that because of the high degree of uncertainty preventing any meaningful projection of climate consequence in the near future, one can not make any fruitful plan that guarantees environmentally friendly results (GWPF 00:45-02:15). Peterson’s alternative approach is to increase emission in the short-term to raise his or her GDP up above the poverty line, who will then care more about and take action for climate change (GWPF 02:45-04:00).

As airtight as it might sound, Peterson equivocating the public’s understanding with the scientific use of the word “uncertain” in his underdeveloped hypothesis is very misleading. As Marshall points out, “when scientists say uncertain, the public hears unsure”. Marshall admits that some parts of climate change are “conjectural, little understood and highly uncertain”, but he doesn’t follow Peterson’s decision to do nothing because of it (Marshall 73). Marshall reaches his conclusion by examining the hypocrisy of policy makers when it comes to other high-profile issue that isn’t environmentally related, such as a terrorist attack. Marshall voices this objection in form a rhetorical question, “… a one percent chance of a terrorist attack should be acted on as though it is a certainty, but a ninety percent chance of severe climate disruption is too uncertain for action?” (Marshall 75).

However, Marshall still agrees that Peterson’s economic hypothesis has a solid psychological ground, as “…[human] do not accept climate change because we wish to avoid the anxiety it generates and the deep changes it requires … because it carries none of the clear markers that would normally lead our brains to overrule our short-term interests, we actively conspire with each other, and mobilize our own biases to keep it perpetually in the background” (Marshall 112). And therefore, by eliminating the short-term distraction that is poverty, they imply the environment will clean itself up from all the new interest arising among the layman.